Jerrad Watts

Understanding morphometrics of cidaroid echinoid spines

	The goal for this project was to take outlines of urchin spines, compare them, and then to properly plot these to help view 
trends among the spines. These outlines are 2D outlines in a coordinate system created through ImageJ on photographs of spines. 
These points cover homologous landmarks (4 landmarks) and then semilandmarks of non-homologous regions of the spines. The semilandmark 
data was then run through the package Morpho, to resample each outline to the same number of points, 250 semilandmarks for a total of 
254 points). This is where the data was edited to not display my own data; the resampling was done incorrectly so that the personal 
research was not accessible for theft. This resampled data is what was uploaded to run through the tutorial. After loading in the data, 
the corrected data sets were put into an array. This array was then run through the package geomorph for analysis. After the 
Procrustes Analysis is run, to ensure all points are in the same orientation and to account for differences in size, the Principal 
Component Analysis (PCA) can then be run. The PCA is the analysis that compared the shapes and can be plotted to give a basic 
understanding of the area the spines plot. The PCA gives a percentage value on each axis to display how much variation can be captured 
by each axis. There can be quite a large range for this, the closer to 100% the two axes grasp, the more variance is captured by this
plot. Low percents sometimes require addition axes beyond what is displayed must be plotted to show additional trends in data. The 
plotted points were extracted and merged with a data set that had details of the spines included, such as species and spine ornamentation
type. This data was then plotted with ggplot2. Convex hulls were grabbed from the data based on details above and plotted in a scatter 
plot with convex hulls overlapping. Trends can be shown by what hulls, or certain details, overlap or do not overlap. Hulls covering a 
wide range of the scatterplot show that an individual genus has variety of spine shapes or in the instance of ornamentation, that certain
ornaments can be found across many spine shapes. Hulls that overlap very little or are separate display that a genus has a unique shape 
in spines or that an ornamentation is characteristic to certain spine shapes. Since the beginning of this project, I have gone on to use 
this on a dataset with 147 specimens in which I have seen these trends and beyond.
 
References & Explanation:

Package geomorph:
Baken E, Collyer M, Kaliontzopoulou A, Adams D (2021). “geomorph v4.0 and 
gmShiny: enhanced analytics and a new graphical interface for a comprehensive 
morphometric experience.” Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 12, 2355-2363.

Code aid:
Caton, N. R., Pearson, S. G., & Dixson, B. J. (2022). Is facial structure an honest cue to
 real-world dominance and fighting ability in men? A pre-registered direct 
replication of. Evolution and Human Behavior, 43(4), 314-324.

Spine ornamentation methods adapted from:
Kroh, A., & Smith, A. B. (2010). The phylogeny and classification of post-Palaeozoic 
echinoids. Journal of systematic Palaeontology, 8(2), 147-212.

R program:
R Core Team. 2024. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. from 
https://www.r-project.org/

Code aid:
Thulman, D. K., Shott, M. J., Slade, A. M., & Williams, J. P.. 2023. Clovis point 
allometry, modularity, and integration: Exploring shape variation due to tool use with landmark-based geometric morphometrics. Plos one, 18(8), e0289489.

General methods:
Wan, J., Foster, W. J., Tian, L., Stubbs, T. L., Benton, M. J., Qiu, X., & Yuan, A.. 2021. 
Decoupling of morphological disparity and taxonomic diversity during the end-Permian mass extinction. Paleobiology, 47(3), 402-417.

Method aid:
Xue, C., Yuan, D. X., Chen, Y., Stubbs, T. L., Zhao, Y., & Zhang, Z. (2024). 
Morphological innovation after mass extinction events in Permian and Early Triassic conodonts based on Polygnathacea. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 112149.
